he's just one of six thousand truckers
still stuck in britain
even though france opened the border
late on tuesday night
they're waiting for the covered test
they need to cross the english channel
police from three days told us that the
testing
will be start soon but they don't know
why when
they don't know when we just won't make
the test and just go straight to home
there is real anguish at the prospect of
missing christmas
with family we are a group of nine
people
and a lot of a lot of babies bulgarians
is here in dover and we are blocked
there's about six thousand lorries now
in the area and
we're using every single tool we can so
for example
uh the uh the army uh are joining us
this evening in order to
assist with the logistics linton besser
abc news
london donald trump has left the white
house
for christmas and left the u.s
government on the verge of financial
chaos
the president's blocked a bill that
would fund america's mammoth military
machine
and he's refusing to sign a second
package designed to ease the financial
pain caused by the pandemic
unless there's a back down the
government will start running out of
money within days
here's greg jennett in washington mr
president
why did you veto the defense bill to his
military chopper
mr president bound for his military
plane
whisked away to a warmer christmas in
florida donald trump's wake in
washington
is turbulent send me a suitable bill
or else the next administration will
have to deliver a covet relief package
and maybe that administration will be me
he blocked via twitter pandemic stimulus
worth more than a trillion australian
dollars
then went further
rejecting the bill that would deliver
another trillion dollars to fund
the military no presidents vetoed annual
defense funding like this for more than
50 years among his reasons that the
package
would require the renaming of certain
military installations
to wash away history a reference to
bases like
fort hood in texas named after
confederate leaders in the civil war
with both decisions donald trump's
rebuffed republican colleagues in
congress
as well as democrats and with the
stimulus freeze
cast relief for millions of families and
the jobless into doubt
right before christmas people are
hurting right now they're hurting
and we need to get the relief to them
immediately unless someone blinks the
funding crisis gets worse next week
without compromise or presidential sign
off
the u.s government slides into shutdown
and its faltering economy
runs the risk of a deeper dive into
recession
leaving after just one term and against
his will donald trump still has a deck
full of powerful cards to play
in his time remaining pardons for
criminals funding vetoes and
driving a wedge through his own
republican party is just the start of it
his is a presidency ending every bid is
unpredictably
as it's been all along greg jennings
abc news washington
donald trump has issued another round of
pardons bringing the number of people
granted clemency to nearly 50
in his final weeks at the white house
the president's former campaign
chairman paul manafort was among them he
was convicted in 2018 as part of an
investigation
into alleged russian meddling in the u.s
election
ex-adviser roger stone and the father of
donald trump's son-in-law
charles kushner also received a full
pardon
kushner senior pleaded guilty years ago
to tax evasion
and making illegal campaign donations
a sick australian expeditioner has been
evacuated from antarctica
in a complex and challenging operation
helicopters from a chinese icebreaker
helped build a special runway near
davis station where the man was located
that allowed an american ski equipped
aircraft to pick him up
and take him to wilkins airstrip near
casey station
an australian airbus then flew the man
to hobart
an outstanding piece of work by a
remarkable team here at the antarctic
division supported by some remarkable
people throughout antarctica from a
range of nations
the antarctic division said the man's
illness was not covered 19 related but
wouldn't give out any details due to
privacy concerns
in a year that was anything but ordinary
the pre-christmas retail rush has stayed
very much intact
thousands of desperate last minute
shoppers have hit the streets right
across south australia
hoping to get their hands on that
elusive last minute bargain
the festive spirit is still well and
truly alive in adelaide
concerns didn't deter bargain-hunting
south australians who had only one thing
in mind
come to do the christmas shopping finish
it now so
ready to go home tomorrow we are doing
last minute
christmas shopping not for anyone in
particular
maybe a secret reminders of coverts
still linger with qr codes and special
restrictions still firmly locked in
place
but retailers are more than happy to
make up for the time and money
previously lost to the pandemic it's
been a busy week heading into christmas
and certainly christmas eve is one of
the biggest days here in the mall
and we're expecting to see tens of
thousands of people here today to grab
those last minute christmas presents
well no matter what your reason for
being out and about on christmas eve
it seems everyone here in rundle mall
shares one thing in common
they're just happy to be here in south
australia for many the pandemic has a
silver lining
bringing people together at home it's
lovely to be back in adelaide
everyone's so happy the weather's great
yeah it's a really good feeling it does
feel like christmas being here in the
mall hasn't felt like christmas until
now
being in adelaide we're we're very lucky
we get
a chance to have a christmas with family
and friends and
things that a lot of other states just
don't get to do and it's
it's lovely i feel very lucky but
despite the joy
speed and efficiency was still the name
of the game we had to get in early had
to get in fast
uh to avoid that christmas rush and now
getting out now getting out like
in out fast a fast shop ahead of a more
leisurely christmas
luke radford abc news adelaide
to finance now and there was some
christmas cheer on the markets today
here's daniel ziffer the stock market
shut
early today and is taking the day off
tomorrow to give the money a rest
and because it's christmas lots of cheer
after seven weeks of gains bhp rose
after restarting operations at a
brazilian mine
five years after a disaster where a dam
burst killing 19 people
and sending waste hundreds of kilometers
downstream
currency information normally whets the
appetite for travel
so unless you're in the import export
business let's move on
glistening or dirty most commodities
rose ahead of the christmas break
and global markets were generally up
ahead of all the presents tomorrow let's
look back at the fortunes of the first
three gifts given at christmas
we already know it's been a bumper year
for gold
it burst through 2 000 us dollars an
ounce for the first time
and isn't far off that now frankincense
is known as the king of oils if we look
at your more
peasant level it's been a roller coaster
for brent crude
and mer is a fragrant resin today you'd
likely get it from zivadin
more than 100 years old and listed on
the swiss stock exchange
it's the world's largest fragrance and
flavouring company
shares hit a record this year as people
tried to hide the stench
of 2020 and that's finance
and i want to bring you to some
important developing news now
like other transport hubs across the
country the coronavirus pandemic has
made darwin airport a little quieter
this year but the imminent arrival of a
special guest from the north pole
has put staff at the airport on high
alert
sansa's helpers have been busy clearing
the airport runway
ensuring a smooth arrival this evening
and after a lengthy flight some tasty
territory treats have been left out for
the reindeer to enjoy
we have a lovely amount of hay for the
reindeer
some mangoes and some dragon fruit best
of all we've got santa a nice cold beer
it's all hands on deck getting these
christmas presents off the carousel
ready for santa to make his deliveries
we're all ready for santa to arrive in
darwin and start
handing out those presents in the air
traffic control tower these offices are
on the lookout for any weather
disturbances
the bureau meteorologists say that it's
been a really smooth ride for santa this
year
the abc has been told santa has been
given priority access to the runway
once he crosses into australian airspace
later tonight
the tower just behind me has a
specialist team who have been working
for weeks for santa's arrival
it's a precision operation to track and
map out a smooth flight path making sure
the reindeer stay well clear of
other aircraft santa's going to come in
from the north today and he's going to
come and fly over the northern suburbs
before he comes and lands at darwin
airport
after a long ride from the north pole
and across the arafura
sea the big man is almost here to
deliver christmas presents across the nt
santa downtown clear to land peter lacy
abc news
[Music]
time for a check of the weather now
here's graham creed
we've still got the potential of some
very heavy rainfall through the central
parts of queensland this is associated
with the trough
over the inland it slowly starts to
contract further north though
as we move into the evening and also
boxing day
a high ridging out in to the tasman seas
bringing an onshore wind flow along the
new south wales coast so a band of
showers moving up the coast they should
clear from sydney
during the morning but they'll persist
around the coastal areas further north
as we move through the day
a high will keep victoria tasmania south
australia and also western australia
clear dry
and generally sunny another fairly hot
day on the way for perth
we are looking at mild to warm
conditions across
the south east but once we hit the south
of victoria and tasmania
temperatures are a little on the cool
side
[Music]
and you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net
and on iview here are the top stories on
abc news
the northern territory government will
revoke its hot spot declaration for most
of sydney outside the northern beaches
people from most of greater sydney
including the blue mountains
and the central coast will now be able
to travel freely to the nt
the announcement comes after nine new
local cases of coronavirus were recorded
in new south wales
following a record 60 000 tests in one
day
[Music]
a convicted terrorist will stay in an
australian prison
after victoria's supreme court deemed
him too risky to release
abdul nasser benbrica has completed his
15-year jail term
but will remain behind bars until 2023
under a continuing detention order
benbricker
and his legal team will consider
appealing the order
[Music]
australia's largest warship will tonight
depart for fiji to help the pacific
nation
deal with the aftermath of tropical
cyclone yasa
hmas adelaide is being deployed from
brisbane to provide immediate assistance
to thousands of fijians particularly
those on remote islands
entire villages were flattened and
thousands left homeless
when the deadly category 5 cyclone hit
last week
and qriket australia says it's confident
the third test between australia and
india
will be held as scheduled in sydney
despite the covert 19 outbreak in new
south wales
the match is scheduled to begin on the
7th of january
with melbourne the preferred backup
location if the test is unable to go
ahead in sydney
and a reminder that we are expecting a
brexit trade deal to be announced in the
coming few hours
these are live pictures of 10 downing
street where uk prime minister boris
johnson
is expected to reveal details of a deal
shortly
and we'll bring you updates throughout
the evening here on abc news
there's been a lot of confusion today
about the new covert rules on sydney's
northern beaches
as locals tried to firm up their plans
for tomorrow
seventy thousand people live in the new
northern red zone
they won't be allowed to have any
visitors from outside the area
and they'll have to make do with up to
only five local guests at home for
christmas
people either side of the narrowband
bridge are still coming to terms with
the new covert border
there's a lot of people online that are
confused
whether they can go across the
boundaries for shopping and exercise
everyone's been a bit anxious on edge
and we hadn't we didn't know how to
prepare for christmas this year it's
been
a little bit all over the place it's
pretty confusing from everyone i've been
speaking to
it doesn't really make sense one thing
that is for sure
is christmas lunch at his restaurant is
cancelled
i had seven functions booked the whole
restaurant my neighbours their
restaurant across the road
everyone was fully booked he says
there's one thing that's canned in a
good way
the takeaway margaritas he's now selling
hoping to spread some christmas cheer
bananas apples oranges pears
in brookvale residents from struggling
migrant communities are still able to
collect the basics
with these covert safe donations
i feel like you know in northern
business there's a lot of people are
ready to support
regardless your religion your you know
background
they always come and support especially
for migraine like me
the community is coming together for
christmas but not physically
with midnight mass replaced by a video
service
it really will be a silent night at st
kieran's
we need to give ourselves a pat on the
back for our patients
through all of this but not everyone has
been patient
a northern beaches woman who lives in
bilgola plateau has been issued
with a thousand dollar fine for breach
and covert restrictions
she was found more than 200 kilometers
away on the south coast
after she collapsed in a sanctuary point
pizza shop
the 37 year old was taken to hospital
and despite
showing covert symptoms refused to be
tested
she's been ordered to isolate for 14
days
james carmody abc news sydney
the reinstatement of wa's hard border
with new south wales has forced
many west australian families to abandon
plans to reunite with loved ones
over christmas but those who have been
able to come
together after months separated by
border closures say it's a special way
to end
a difficult year
a family christmas celebration which so
nearly didn't happen
we were waiting with baited breath until
uh
until the last minute and we we were
lucky we made it by the skin of our
teeth and we were so
so relieved alicia freebree and her
sydney family made it into perth in the
nick of time
the day before wa once again shut the
door to new south wales
and that meant a festive season reunion
with her parents could go ahead
amazing amazing so special to see
the grandkids run with open arms to
their grandparents and the excitement on
my parents faces was priceless with wa's
border having been closed for much of
scores of west australian families are
getting to reunite with loved ones for
the first time in months
and after an extraordinary year some
can't believe
they've made it home for christmas we
had already made
like contingency plans um for like an
orphan
christmas over there so yeah absolutely
did not expect that this would be
happening
many haven't been so lucky with the hard
border with new south wales back in
place
flights from sydney to perth which would
have been full this week with christmas
travelers
have instead been virtually empty with
family stranded on opposite
sides of the country while the new south
wales border has slammed shut
wa is throwing open the doors to south
australians on christmas day
and that means some families are
planning a last-minute dash to reunite
before the day is out
exactly absolutely ecstatic and it's
like i said it can't come soon enough i
don't want to wish my life away but i
can't
we can't come soon enough for many that
won't come cheap
with seats on the earliest christmas day
flight from adelaide to perth going
for more than eleven hundred dollars
jacob cakey abc news
hundreds of australians will spend this
christmas hunkered away from their
families in quarantine
either stuck inside hotel rooms or
isolated between the walls of their own
homes
but for more than 500 people who
recently flew into the northern
territory
locals are making an effort to give them
the best christmas ever
we've been working on some crafts we
made a lovely christmas tree
and i brought christmas lights with us
from jordan a donor in darwin may not
have been where bronwen seal expected
her family to spend christmas but after
a tumultuous
year she's wrapped to be there honestly
i think it's going to be one of the most
memorable christmases we've ever had
she's one of more than 500 repatriated
australians from europe and
india set to spend their christmas day
in the howard springs quarantine centre
in the nt top end in a bid to help them
ward off loneliness and homesickness
there's been a flurry of activity
to help give them the best christmas
possible in tough circumstances
i couldn't imagine being in quarantine
and
being away from family or celebrating
christmas you know not having those
usual
festive celebrations around more than a
hundred children are among the batch of
international arrivals who the trauma
center is trying to make feel
special on the big day we got the
approval to buy each child a christmas
present
we had a budget for that and we hit the
shops
hams are being sliced turkeys roasted
and nt
tiger prawns shelled for a festive feast
to say
welcome home we know that they're going
to be isolated and feeling lonely on
this special christmas day
so we're going to do our very very best
to provide them with a real
aussie christmas dinner and what would
christmas day be without a christmas
pudding
for the hundreds of australians in
quarantine in howard springs this
christmas
they'll be dining on a homemade kakadu
plum pudding
with a cherry on top they're making a
really big effort to feed us well and to
help us feel um well looked after
and i think we have the only the only
real problem that we have is that we
have to have our final covered test on
christmas day unfortunately
singing the praises for christmas like
no other we
wish you a merry christmas
matt garrick abc news darwin
the father of kiera glennon has spoken
for the first time
since his daughter's killer was
sentenced 52-year old bradley edwards
was given a 40-year non-parole period
for the murders of jane rimmer and ms
glennon in the 90s
david webber reports from perth well
really the point of the statement was to
address
questions that the media had asked of
him outside the courtroom
and since through intermediaries because
he found that
a lot of the questions were common and
he he wanted to really
put his feelings to the media so the
media
in general would perhaps leave the
family alone so that he could
grieve kyra in private and the family
could really uh take their memories of
her to what he referred to as a quiet
place
so um among the the things that uh he
said he did point out that it had been
an exhausting journey for the family
uh the trial and of course since the
murder of kyra glennon in 1997
uh he said that he didn't want to
participate in any of the various media
uh formats that have been produced there
are apparently some documentaries and
and maybe even some fictional material
that's in production at the moment
related to this
he rejected the idea of accepting any
money for participation because he said
this would be an affront
to kira uh he referred to he didn't
refer to bradley robert edwards by name
he resisted
uh referring to edwards by name but did
say i did call upon people to uh keep
the parents
of bradley robert edwards in their minds
because they were going through their
own trauma
but most of the statement was focused on
on keira and uh what uh
his family has suffered since she was
taken
in 1997 by bradley robert edwards he
said there will always be an empty chair
at the table
obviously coming up to christmas is
another uh period when you know kyra is
not there he referred to the family's
existence as being before kira and after
kira
so uh that pain and that struggle uh
that emotional drain will never be taken
away
he did say we will continue to try to
walk with as much dignity as we are able
to
through this nightmare we've been
catapulted into let's hear from mr
glennon
himself this is some of what he had to
say to the media
we do not wish to spend further time
in expressing our views on a perverse
primitive predator who with ruthless
determination
sought out and abducted young women to
rape and kill
simply for his own gratification we
don't want to spend any more time on
that as a family
instead
we wish to use the time to remember
kiera
in a quiet space and to draw strength
from her courage
and appreciate the gift of her short
life
of 28 years edwards was sentenced
for the murders of kyra glennon and jane
rimmer in the 1990s
and uh for a rape in 1995 and an
attempted sexual assault
in 1988. he was charged with the murder
of sarah spears and found not guilty
she hasn't been seen alive since january
1996 her body has never been found
the police commissioner said they still
want to talk to bradley robert edwards
he wouldn't go into any detail about how
that would take place
but uh he would still seem to be the
prime suspect in her murder and that
case
remains open
an obstetrician at adelaide's women's
and children's hospital
has criticised sa health for releasing a
major report on the deaths of four
babies
on christmas eve the report looked into
the loss of four newborn babies
within a two-month period a message of
reassurance in the care of the state's
most precious
i think the public should be confident
in the services that we have here in
south australia
in the wake of the baby's deaths an
independent report found
care provided to babies was appropriate
with no major clinical concerns at the
women's and children's hospital
but it says it's unclear if all medical
staff understood the baby's care plans
and communication needs to improve we
aspire to have the very best possible
care and the only way you can deliver
the best possible care
is seeking each small piece where you
haven't quite got it right or you could
do something a bit better
and putting that in place the four
babies three with cardiac conditions
and one with sepsis died in september
and october
the report found no evidence the
pandemic had worsened health outcomes
despite babies being transferred to
sydney instead of covert struck
melbourne
and that just one baby would have
benefited from a specialized ecmo life
support machine
but obstetrician johns fagos has blasted
the review
they're not not strong recommendations
better consultation
let's get a transport to protocol game
we've been doing it for 18 years sending
babies to melbourne
surely we would have got that right if
people are looking at the review and
thinking well there should be more in it
there should be more recommendations
i would suggest we can take comfort from
the fact that there aren't
a whole raft of recommendations because
the care as i go back to
at winston children's hospital is good
sa health will implement all of the
recommendations
and while it's ruled out establishing a
local cardiac surgery unit
it says it's still working on an ecmo
service brittany evans abc news
adelaide it's supposed to be a time of
joy
but new figures show that the festive
season also brings a sharp rise in cases
of family violence
christmas and boxing days are the worst
prompting a new public safety campaign
urging early intervention
[Music]
these public safety campaigns show for
some families
christmas is not a time of joy i hide in
the bed when it starts and i block my
ears so i can't hear
the national no to violence campaign has
collected police data from around the
country
that reveals how family violence
escalates
over christmas in victoria assaults
jumped
39 on christmas day last year and stayed
high on boxing day
in new south wales domestic assault
rates went up by more than half
queensland data shows incidents rose by
nearly a third
over those two days these statistics
show
that the festive season is one of the
most dangerous times
for families in the nt reports to police
jumped up to 18
in south australia offences rose by up
to 12 and a half percent
and in tasmania there's been a 35
rise in incidents over christmas in the
past decade
it's a stressful time there's financial
pressure
and there's also increased alcohol
consumption and we're worried
particularly this year
with the extra pressure of lockdown and
the pandemic that the numbers are going
to be worse
it's very very likely that the stats may
not double but may
triple this year it's prompted a
campaign urging people to have a safe
festive season
if they see something concerning they
they should do something they should
they should call it out don't be afraid
to ask for help we don't we don't want
people to get to the point where they
feel that they have such a loss of
control that they make the choice to
use violence the message
early intervention is key alison
brownlee abc news
and if this story has raised any issues
for you you can get help by calling the
national sexual assault and family
violence counselling helpline that's 1
800 respect
which is 1-800-737-732
the sales of crayfish are surging in
western australia as
china's ban on live imports sees the
local market flooded with fresh lobster
people have been flocking to seafood
markets and some seafood lovers are even
buying them directly off the boat this
christmas
the pots come up and the craze pop out
the last minute rush to snag a lobster
for christmas lunch
is on and this year the demand is
insatiable
normally 95 of the annual catch of the
western rock lobster is sent to china
but because of china's ban on live
lobster imports
almost all of these crayfish will be
sold locally and
at historically cheap prices for these
punters looking for a christmas eve deal
fresh is best part of christmas eve
it's the tradition that is
we're just getting caught today we've
come the other day there was no one here
people are queuing up across the country
to get their hands on some fresh cheap
seafood
that would otherwise have gone overseas
in wa alone
more than 20 000 lobsters have been sold
from the back of boats in the past month
but it's what will happen after
christmas that has fish's concern
it's really uncertain it means it's been
great up to christmas but what happens
after
who knows it's a christmas silver lining
in an otherwise
tense trade standoff john d palone abc
[Music]
news
joe burns and matthew wade have retained
their spots for the second cricket test
against india
at the mcg with australia set to name an
unchanged eleven following the host's
convincing win in the first test
coach justin langer says it would take a
courageous man to swing changes
an early christmas present for
australia's openers confirmation their
spots are secure for the boxing day test
a pretty courageous men to go to change
the 11
this test match after the last one so at
this stage
it'll be very unless something happens
over the next few days
and they can happen in the world we live
in but
we're going with the same 11. with
veteran david warner expected to be
ready to return for the third test
the pressure to perform will be high
these things have a funny way of working
themselves out and the guys who are
playing make and runs they'll keep
getting selected it's usually the way it
works
where the third test will be played
remains unclear qriket australia says it
wants the match to be played at the scg
as scheduled
but if sydney's coronavirus outbreak
makes that untenable
its preference would be to have
back-to-back mcg tests
we are currently planning all systems go
for the new year's test to take place
in sydney as scheduled and then
moving on to brisbane and the gamba for
the
for the fourth test while australia's
side is set for boxing day
india's 11 remains a mystery there'll be
at least two changes to the team that
collapsed in adelaide
with virat kohli and muhammad xiami to
miss the rest of the series
whenever you take the best players out
of any cricket team
then of course it weakens them that's
just reality so yeah that gives us an
advantage
both sides trained on the mcg today
where 30
000 fans are expected on boxing day it
will be the first time the venue has
hosted spectators
since the women's t20 world cup final
back in march
tom wilde abc news
chinese summer soon yang has had his
doping ban overturned
meaning he's free to return to the sport
in 2018 the olympic gold medalist
refused to hand over blood and urine
samples
after questioning the authority of a
doping control officer
the court of operation for sport handed
him a maximum
eight-year ban earlier this year soon
appealed to the swiss federal tribunal
his lawyers presented evidence that a
judge the former italian foreign
minister franco fratini
made anti-china comments on social media
the world anti-dubbing agency says
it'll have the entire case reheard
collingwood has confirmed it received an
internal report into allegations of
racism at the club almost a week ago
the magpies have today acknowledged that
the board was
handed the report by an indigenous
academic larissa berent
last thursday but the club won't say
when it will publicly reveal the details
former magpie defender haretiya lamumba
alleges racism at the club which sparked
the probe
last friday collingwood president eddie
mcguire announced he would be stepping
down in 2021
it takes an average eight minutes for an
ambulance to arrive at the scene of a
cardiac arrest
and paramedics say the time in between
is
crucial a brisbane tennis coach knows
first-hand the life-saving skill of cpr
after suffering a heart attack during a
recent match
he owes his life to those who are
playing alongside him
it's a comeback on the court worth
celebrating
these men are usually clive martin's
training partners but two months ago
they saved his life suddenly clive just
collapsed on the floor unconscious i
checked his response he wasn't there he
wasn't breathing properly okay if
there's no response no briefing
defibrillator
clive's colleague coach gabriel uzum
thanks scott
had learned the life-saving skill of cpr
just two weeks prior
for me was just doing a job everything
that i learned in the course it just
came in my mind a lot of people go
through the whole life without actually
having to
like to use it and two weeks after boom
here we are
it was the first real-life scenario for
glenn priddle who's taken a cpr course
every year for three decades until you
actually
have to do it on the field as it were
then it really clicks into place how
important it is
having their friend back on the sideline
is living proof but it was touch and go
with mr martin enduring five days in a
coma
and a quadruple bypass the family came
in but they were told not to next day
would be the last day
so they went back every night the
queensland ambulance service says
cardiac arrest is the most
time-critical and time-dependent
condition that paramedics respond to
early interventions are crucial for
survival it takes on average eight
minutes for a crew to arrive
had i been driving or anywhere else
haven't been gone yet
his recovery will sideline him for a few
months but retirement's not on the cards
yet
after what's already been an impressive
career of high-profile clients
i had elton john and cliff richards and
then we had shaking stevens
errol brown we had princess diana
mr martin was almost treated like
royalty himself the first time he
returned to the club it's amazing to
have him back
i just can't describe her like two
months ago he was almost dead and
he's here just normal brittany klein abc
news
time for a check of the weather now with
graeme creed
we've got some widespread showers and
thunderstorms across queensland and the
potential of some localized falls
producing some heavy rainfall about
central areas
but as we move through christmas day and
into boxing day that activity starts to
shift a little bit further north
across the south the high pressure
system remains the dominant feature but
really it is queensland looking at the
potential of the heaviest of the
rainfall across the nation as we move
through christmas day
there is a possibility of flash flooding
we are likely to see severe thunderstorm
warnings over those
inland areas the southerly change is
moving up the new south wales coast most
of the showers are probably going to
fall quite early in the morning for
sydney but they're possible again as we
head into the evening
for victoria a little bit of a cool day
through the southern areas we should see
plenty of
sunny breaks though it does warm up
though as you move through the weekend
also a little bit cool for parts of
tasmania inland areas a little bit
milder
but along the coast an onshore wind flow
will just help to keep those
temperatures
a little bit on the low side for south
australia hot
dry and sunny conditions forecast just
that little bit milder about the
southeast
and also the coastal parts for western
australia very hot conditions anywhere
over the inland will be that margin
milder along
the coastal fringe cools down even
further through the southwest as we move
into boxing day
showers and thunderstorms will clear
from central parts of the northern
territory contracting up
into the north where we expect to see
the potential of some localised heavy
falls
and an update to our breaking news
earlier tonight and an emergency
bushfire burning in northeastern parts
of bullsbrook in western australia
has now been downgraded to a watching
act authorities say the alert level for
the fire was downgraded
due to favourable conditions but say
there's still a possible threat to lives
and homes
a leave now alert is still in place for
people and properties bounded by ashton
road
chittering road smith road and jess road
in the city of swan
due to changing conditions it's believed
the blaze was sparked by a car hitting a
power pole
and you can keep up to date any time by
going to
a news.abc.net.u and on iview i'm nick
hoes more on our top stories coming up
next here on abc news
[Music]
a league and w league football is on
live and free every single weekend
the rivalries
[Music]
stay home with the abc for the biggest
night of the year
at 8 30 join rove for
and at nine charlie pickering and zan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
changes we've made to help stop the
spread need to continue into the future
remember to keep making covert safe
choices
like maintaining physical distancing
practicing good hygiene
and wearing a mask when needed to
protect others stay at home when unwell
and get tested for covert 19 keep the
covert safe app active so you can be
contacted if needed
together let's keep going and stay safe
find out more
at health.gov.eu authorised by the
australian government canberra
i just can't take my eyes i just can't
take my
eyes i just can't take my eyes off of
you
it's the way that i feel when i'm
looking at you
doing the things that you
[Music]
you're do i'm mad you're mad
we're all mad good evening
and welcome to news at six last thing i
need right now is to get involved with a
married woman
i've got my reputation to think of what
do you know about what i want to achieve
let's just pretend that we live in the
real world where else would you rather
be
it's jack jack
my eyes
know the tradition cultural bird brings
the land back to life
know the reason the most important thing
to me as a gundangara person is
protecting country for future
generations
know the languages reporting from our in
the country lara kia country
reporting from ghana country reporting
from pinematic from larakir country
i'm on your toyota country from nepaluna
lutrowita
for abc news know the meaning i am this
country this country is me
know the story with abc news
tonight the northern territory becomes
the first place to revoke its hot spot
declaration for the majority of greater
sydney
after just nine cases are reported in
new south wales today
a number of suburbs that are already
directly located
around the avalon outbreak will remain
as hot spot
areas
[Music]
a convicted terrorist to spend a further
three years in prison after his 15-year
jail term comes to an end
australia's largest warship bound for
fiji to provide humanitarian aid
in the aftermath of tropical cyclone
yasa
and the third test between australia and
india to go ahead
as planned in sydney
hello and welcome to abc news i'm nick
hose
the number of new covet infections in
the state of new south wales
is staying relatively low but
authorities say the threat isn't over
yet
there have been nine new cases taking
the avalon cluster to 104.
more than 60 000 people were tested
yesterday
that's another new record as contact
tracers do their work
a possible new threat has emerged three
cases have now been linked to a sports
bar at circular quay
raising fears the outbreak could be
spreading in the cbd
another single-digit day cause for some
holiday
optimism but still not a license for a
sydney
silly season don't let the the
celebrations or the christmas
activities reduce the necessary
nature in which we have to be on guard
we are not out of the woods yet
we need to work together we need to
track down
any unrecognized transmission but one
particular figure from today was a
welcome shock to authorities
i nearly fell off my chair literally
when dr chan and i
and others realized that sixty thousand
people came forward to testing to eight
pm last night
it's topped monday's record number of
swabs by more than fifteen thousand the
northern beaches cluster is now
at 104 and today there's further proof
the virus is spreading south
we are concerned about people who may
have been infectious who went to work in
the cbd
and then have passed that on to other
people in the cbd and those people have
then passed it on
back in their communities three workers
in the north east of the cbd have tested
positive
and another three cases are linked to a
circular key
sports bar does mean there's potential
chains of transmission that we're not on
top of
and that is a concern and some
transmission risks are still being found
an aged care resident is in isolation
after a nurse
involved in transporting them tested
positive
the infections linked to the avalon
cluster that the nurse was also
recently involved in a hotel quarantine
transfer
and investigations continue into a
sydney airline worker who tested
positive
after returning from overseas through
the northern territory
mistakes will continue to be made and i
can't pretend that's not going to happen
something else that happened
unexpectedly the nt
has revoked its hot spot declaration for
greater sydney
but not the northern beaches and sydney
ciders quarantined in the top end will
be released
with restrictions for the next two days
in place crisis cabinet will next meet
on boxing day
to reassess the restrictions but on new
year's eve
there is one certainty seven minutes of
fireworks at midnight will be happening
no matter what
but i'll certainly be watching it from
home and we encourage everybody else to
do that as well
a plea to stay in so sydney can get
back out in the new year tim swanston
abc news
a man who criss-crossed the country has
only just tested positive for
coronavirus
after he arrived in south australia from
new south wales
the case was detected on york peninsula
and the man and five close contacts have
been put into quarantine as a precaution
sa health says it's a timely reminder
just a day
after declaring the parafield cluster
closed
health authorities delivered the news of
a weak positive result
so close to christmas this person is a
male
in his 20s and he arrived in south
australia by road and he traveled
from new south wales and came into south
australia in the early hours of monday
hours later they confirmed the new case
is not infectious
even when you've recovered from covert
19 you can still be producing fragments
of the virus
in the back of the nose and it can be
picked up on a swab the man's blood test
had shown
signs of an old infection one he may
have had no idea about
while in victoria two months ago they
haven't ever had
symptoms of covert 19 they've never been
tested before
but we do know that there was a a lot of
covet in the state at that time and
there were quite a lot of people who
were asymptomatic
the man flew from darwin to sydney
earlier this month coincidentally on
board a flight with a covert infected
crew member
he then traveled to wadonga and was
tested for the virus at the sa border on
monday for the first time
before he drove on to maitland on york
peninsula
there's also been a more clear-cut
positive case a man in his 70s who has
been in a medi hotel
since returning from doha despite the
weak positive from the new south wales
traveler
there's a warning to regional south
australia to comply with the state's qr
code and
testing regimes so i think this is
perhaps good news for people there today
because it looks like this is indeed an
old case but an absolute reminder to no
matter where you are
in south australia there is always a
risk of covert 19.
testing stations will continue to
operate on christmas day
natasha calios abc news adelaide
queensland health say a superior crew
member tested positive to covert 19 in
cairns
and in a statement the otts captain says
they'll fully cooperate with authorities
police are investigating the superiot's
arrival in queensland
they say 14 people were directed into
hotel quarantine
after it docked in north queensland
after travelling from the maldives
six crew members stayed on board to
maintain the vessel
and they're being tested the super yacht
in question
has not been very cooperative at all in
relation to the information being
provided to the queensland police
service
and where they have been a second
positive case a man in his 40s has been
at home
quarantined since returning to
queensland from sydney's northern
beaches
health authorities don't believe either
case had contact with the wider
community
an emergency bushfire burning in
northeastern parts of bullsbrook in west
in australia
has been downgraded to a watching act
authorities say the alert level for the
fire was downgraded due to good
conditions
but say there is still a possibility of
threat to lives and homes
a leave now alert is still in place for
people and properties bounded by ashton
road
tutoring road smith road and jess road
in the city of swan
due to changing conditions it's believed
the fire was sparked by a car hitting a
pole
[Music]
a convicted terrorist who once praised
osama bin laden
will stay in an australian prison after
victoria's supreme court deemed him
too risky to release abdul naysa
benbrika has spent 15 years behind bars
for leading a terror cell
accused of planning attacks on
high-profile people but even though the
father of seven has finished his
sentence
he'll stay in maximum security he's
court reporter danny tran
it was only after years in prison that
abdul nasser benbrica
claimed to have seen the error of his
ways telling others
violence in the name of allah was
suddenly no longer necessary
what do they look for here but today
victoria's supreme court found that
proposition
had a whiff of implausibility i'm
satisfied that the defendant has not
renounced or changed his previous
beliefs
which justified terrorist violence in
the name of allah
benbrica was sentenced to 15 years
behind bars for leading a terrorist
cell accused of planning high-profile
attacks
and discussing a possible assassination
attempt on then-prime minister
john howard the 60-year-old sentence was
due to finish in 2020
but those plans were dashed today after
commonwealth lawyers
successfully convinced victoria's
supreme court
to keep the fire brand cleric in maximum
security prison
i am satisfied to a high degree of
probability on the basis of admissible
evidence
that the defendant poses an unacceptable
risk it comes
more than a month after home affairs
minister peter dutton stripped benbreca
of his australian citizenship he's the
first individual to have lost his
citizenship on shore
under the terrorism-related provisions
of the australian citizenship act
his crimes were not the product of some
moments of carelessness or lack of
judgment
his was well organized and executed
conduct driven by very powerful feelings
and beliefs
which had him perfectly willing to
perpetrate
extreme and outrageous crimes in the
name of his faith
abdul nasser bin breaker didn't react as
he learned the next
three years of his life would be no
different to the last 15.
the question now is whether he'll appeal
against the order
danny tran abc news melbourne
authorities are investigating after an
elderly man was found
bashed to death in his home in sydney's
east on sunday
seventy-seven-year-old peter mccarthy
was found with severe head and facial
injuries in south koji
police are still trying to establish
when he died and have released
cctv footage of his last known movements
he's very very well thought of uh by all
people i've met him a very gentle man
again wouldn't hurt anyone so for this
to happen and for his life to end
this in such fashion his surrenders it's
really a despicable crime
police have also released images of two
people they want to speak with
they're appealing to anyone with
information to come forward
well the family of an apprentice tradie
killed by a senior constable
is calling for a royal commission into
policing in new south wales
bradley balzan was chased by two
officers in western sydney
because they thought he looked
suspicious police then shot the
20-year-old
after he allegedly grabbed one of their
guns his loved ones are now demanding
answers
mark ready has this exclusive report
this photo is a
bradley and adam father and son a wall
of happy memories now
a memorial for a grieving family he was
handsome
he was cheeky he was funny he made us
laugh
he loved his family he loved his pets
his friends for nola bowsen
christmas will be forever cursed
yesterday her grandson bradley
was killed by police i think it was
police brutality
because um everything that's
happened to him has been terrifying
the terror unfolded on a trip to the
shops four plainclothed officers in an
unmarked car
pulled up next to him his family says an
officer asked
what are you doing they kept following
him
and he said something like i'm sick of
this effort and he ran
because he was scared police claimed the
20 year old was acting suspiciously
and so chased him into his own backyard
even to that stage they did not notify
that that
they were police officers according to
his family
bradley bowsen grabbed a shovel to
defend himself
before his dog bit one of two senior
constables
police claim he snatched one of their
guns and fired the first shot
his grandmother says pepper spray was
used and then an officer
fired the deadly shot shooting someone
in the stomach
isn't shooting to stop that's shooting
to kill
bradley bolson's father adam said he was
told to stay inside when the shooting
unfolded
he said he only realized his son was a
man shot dead by police
when they showed him a photo of the body
covered in blood
an independent review will follow an
internal police investigation
but that means little to his parents
devastated
they've got one child they've got one
child and now they've got none
and that's never ever going to come back
old photographs are all that remain
mark ready abc news sydney
political leaders have used their annual
christmas message to thank essential
workers on the front line of the covert
19 emergency
the sacrifice of medical aged care and
retail staff has been highlighted
by the prime minister and opposition
leader who have also urged people
to keep safe during the festive season
michael
and adam in wishing everyone a very stay
safe
stay covered safe may god bless you and
your family this christmas
merry christmas australia may the
festive season bring peace
to you and your loved ones
and may 2020 get in the bin
both leaders have also acknowledged the
difficulties faced by many australians
this year
australia's largest warship will travel
to fiji to help the pacific nation deal
with the aftermath of tropical cyclone
yasa
hmas adelaide is heading from brisbane
carrying 750 personnel
including specialist medical and
engineering teams they'll provide
immediate assistance to thousands of
fijians
we're expecting that the the measures
we've applied here on the wharf before
the ship sails will mean
it's a very covered safe mindful
deployment to fiji
to make sure we don't take covert out to
that particular country
entire villages were flattened and
thousands left homeless when the deadly
category 5 cyclone yasa hit fiji last
week
well china has denied its tortured an
australian democracy
advocate who's been detained in china
for almost two years
writer jung hen jun is being held on
suspicion of spying
with the trial scheduled for january
he's told supporters he's been subjected
to torture
and hundreds of interrogations but a
foreign ministry spokesperson
says in beijing denies dr young is being
mistreated
yet another new and highly contagious
strain of coronavirus has emerged in the
uk
this variant originated in south africa
prompting the british government to
impose travel restrictions
at the same time millions more britons
are facing stricter lockdowns from
boxing day
europe correspondent lynton besser
reports from london
the number of coronavirus patients in
british hospitals
is now approaching levels not seen since
the first wave of the pandemic
more than 39 000 confirmed cases of the
disease
detected in the past 24 hours across the
country
cases have risen 57 percent in the last
week
the average covered hospital admissions
are 1909 a day
that's the highest figure since
mid-april most worrying though
another new strain of the disease has
been detected
this new variant is highly concerning
because it is yet more transmissible
and it appears to have mutated further
than the new variant that's been
discovered in the uk
the mutation was first confirmed in
south africa
and then discovered among uk contacts of
people who had traveled
into britain first we are quarantining
cases
and close contacts of cases found here
in the uk second we're placing
immediate restrictions on travel from
south africa
[Music]
work is now underway to understand
exactly how the new variant behaves
but scientists are confident approved
vaccines will still work
we have no evidence at the moment that
the vaccine will not work because the
vaccine produces a strong immune
response and it's broad
and acts against lots of variation in
the virus
the uk has other fires it's trying to
put out too
this european truck driver was arrested
on wednesday at dover
[Applause]
he's just one of six thousand truckers
still stuck in britain
even though france opened the border
late on tuesday night
they're waiting for the covert test they
need to cross the english channel
police from three days told us that the
testing
will be start soon but they don't know
why when
they don't know when we just won't make
the test and just go straight to home
there is real anguish at the prospect of
missing christmas
with family we are a group of nine
people
and a lot of a lot of babies bulgarians
is here in dover and we are blocked
there's about six thousand lorries now
in the area and uh we're
using every single tool we can so for
example
uh the the army uh are joining us this
evening in order to
assist with the logistics linton besser
abc news
london and we are expecting a brexit
trade deal to be announced in the coming
few hours
these are live pictures of central
london where uk prime minister boris
johnson
is expected to reveal the details of a
deal shortly
however there are still long lines of
trucks backed up at the british border
and police blockades in place this is a
live look at dover port where
europe-bound trucks are still being
prevented from crossing the british
channel
we'll bring you updates throughout the
evening here on abc news
donald trump has left the white house
for christmas and left the u.s
government on the verge of financial
chaos
the president's blocked a bill that
would fund america's mammoth military
machine
and he's refusing to sign a second
package meant to ease the financial pain
caused by the pandemic
unless there's a back down the
government will start running out of
money within days
greg janet reports from washington mr
president
why did you veto the defense bill to his
military chopper
mr president bound for his military
plane
whisked away to a warmer christmas in
florida donald trump's wake in
washington
is turbulent send me a suitable bill
or else the next administration will
have to deliver a coveted relief package
and maybe that administration will be me
he blocked via twitter pandemic stimulus
worth more than a trillion australian
dollars
then went further
rejecting the bill that would deliver
another trillion dollars to fund
the military no president's vetoed
annual defense funding like this for
more than
50 years among his reasons that the
package
would require the renaming of certain
military installations
to wash away history a reference to
bases like
fort hood in texas named after
confederate leaders in the civil war
with both decisions donald trump's
rebuffed republican colleagues in
congress
as well as democrats and with the
stimulus freeze
cast relief for millions of families and
the jobless into doubt
right before christmas people are
hurting right now they're hurting
and we need to get the relief to them
immediately unless someone blinks the
funding crisis gets worse next week
without compromise or presidential
sign-off
the us government slides into shutdown
and its faltering economy
runs the risk of a deeper dive into
recession
leaving after just one term and against
his will donald trump still
has a deck full of powerful cards to
play in his time remaining
pardons for criminals funding vetoes and
driving a wedge through his own
republican parties just the start of it
his is a presidency ending every bit as
unpredictably
as it's been all along greg jennett
abc news washington and despite the
covered recession and mass
layoffs retailers are hoping shoppers
will go on a record spending spree
after christmas and they expect much of
that shopping to happen online
the industry is predicting people will
spend 2.75
billion dollars to make the boxing day
sales
the biggest in a decade
there's nothing quite like seafood to
celebrate christmas
couple lobster fish prawns just got
everything i need
but the scramble to buy australia's
finest catch for tomorrow's festive
feast required
a bit of patience during a marathon
trade at the sydney fish market this
morning
you'd expect to see about 200 tons of
prawns be sold
over the 36 hour trade uh you'd expect
to see at least a few hundred thousand
oysters be shocked live and sold live in
the shell
the markets in melbourne were also
buzzing
customers seeking out the best buys from
the butcher to the bakery
but in retail stores the crowds were
certainly smaller than previous years
i've never experienced it this quiet
before
it's quite nice being careful just
social distancing
the industry is instead turning its
attention to post-christmas trade
according to the national retailers
association shoppers are expected to
spend
2.75 billion dollars this boxing day
that would be up 5 percent on last year
the association is confident people will
spend
even after a year of huge job losses and
a recession
this is set to be our biggest boxing day
in 10 years because we have been unable
to travel
and we know that australians love to
travel they are really spending money
domestically at this time as our
shopping habits continue to change
most retailers have already launched
their boxing day sales
online it could mean the days of the
crowd crush
desperate for a bargain could be over
what we've done
as a business is ensured that the
customers have a great choice in the way
that they want to shop so
we have got online that's open right now
boxing day sales may never
be the same again
lydia feng abc news
joe burns and matthew wade have retained
their spots for the second cricket test
against india at the mcg
with australia set to name an unchanged
eleven following the host's convincing
win in the first test
coach justin langer said it would take a
courageous man to swing changes
an early christmas present for
australia's openers confirmation their
spots are secure for the boxing day test
they're pretty courageous men to go to
change the 11
this test match after the last one so at
this stage
it'll be very unless something happens
over the next few days
and they can happen in the world we live
in but
we're going with the same 11. with
veteran david warner expected to be
ready to return for the third test
the pressure to perform will be high
these things have a funny way of working
themselves out and the guys who are
playing make and runs they'll keep
getting selected it's usually the way it
works
where the third test will be played
remains unclear qriket australia says it
wants the match to be played at the scg
as scheduled
but if sydney's coronavirus outbreak
makes that untenable
its preference would be to have
back-to-back mcg tests
we are currently planning all systems go
for the new year's test to take place
in sydney as scheduled and then
moving on to brisbane and the gamba for
the
for the fourth test while australia's
side is set for boxing day
india's 11 remains a mystery there'll be
at least two changes to the team that
collapsed in adelaide
with virat kohli and muhammad xiami to
miss the rest of the series
whenever you take the best players out
of any cricket team
then of course it weakens them that's
just reality so yeah that gives us an
advantage
both sides trained on the mcg today
where 30
000 fans are expected on boxing day it
will be the first time the venue has
hosted spectators
since the women's t20 world cup final
back in march
tom wilde abc news
chinese swimmer soon yang has had his
doping ban overturned
meaning he's free to return to the sport
in 2018 the olympic gold medalist
refused to hand over blood and urine
samples
after questioning the authority of a
doping control officer
the court of arbitration for sport
handed him a maximum
eight-year ban earlier this year soon
appealed to the swiss federal tribunal
his lawyers presented evidence that a
judge the former italian foreign
minister franco fratini
made anti-china comments on social media
the world anti-doping agency says it
will have the case
reheard with a new panel of arbitrators
well it's time to check in with the
weather here's graham creed
we've still got the potential of some
very heavy rainfall through the central
parts of
queensland this is associated with the
trough over the inland
it slowly starts to contract further
north though as we move into the evening
and
also boxing day a high ridging out into
the tasman seas bringing an onshore wind
flow along the new south wales coast so
a band of showers moving up the coast
they should clear from sydney
during the morning but they'll persist
around the coastal areas further north
as we move
through the day ohio will keep victoria
tasmania south australia and also
western australia clear dry and
generally sunny another fairly hot day
on the way for perth
we are looking at mild warm conditions
across the southeast but once we hit the
south of victoria and tasmania
temperatures are a little on the cool
side well santa claus has urged everyone
to stay
safe and healthy before setting off with
his reindeer from his hometown
on the arctic circle coronavirus
restrictions meant there were no crowds
at santa claus village in northern
finland this year
this year he spoke to a virtual audience
saying he hoped christmas would bring a
little relief
during what's been a very very difficult
year
parents should also pay special
attention to children
and young people as the past pandemic
year has been tough for them too
many children have said this out loud to
me
he then left on his sleigh through the
snowy forest on his annual christmas
journey
and that is the latest from abc news
remember you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net.u
and on iview i'm nick hose more news
soon whenever you want
wherever you are know the story with abc
news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world this will be the first
step in an ever expanding bubble go to
news.abc.net.ou
or download the news app anywhere
anytime
a summer of entertainment awaits on abc
eye view
[Music]
carried me to these places that i never
thought imaginable
together we can create a better future
so you're saying you'll keep
squeaky i decided to stand up last night
and i'll continue to stand up
we're coming to you from the great
barrier reef which is like
it's in my dna in it
your summertime streaming is on abc eye
view
in the summertime
we love the aussie lifestyle from the
bush
to the beach there's an abundance of
beauty
but when beauty becomes the beast
what can i do get the latest information
and updates from
every region in one place we've got
reporters right across all of the
affected regions tonight
reliable source for information abc
radio we're all there for them stay
connected
on tv radio and the all-new abc
emergency website
[Music]
welcome back to another episode of
foreign correspondent retrospective
a special series on the extraordinary
rise of china over the past decade
as witnessed by our correspondents
one story china doesn't want the world
to see is the mass repression of more
than a million
uyghurs a muslim ethnic minority in the
country's remote northwest
china says that harsh security measures
were imposed
to combat islamist extremists but
advances in commercial satellite
technology
have now exposed the vast industrial
scale
of china's repression showing massive
work camps designed to hold
hundreds of thousands of uighurs
beijing stands accused of trying to
eliminate
uyga culture and identity through a mass
program of forced assimilation
back in 2014 as the crackdown on the
uyghurs first intensified
correspondent stephen macdonald ventured
out to xinjiang province
to throw some light on china's own war
on terror
china's far west has long been a place
of
mystery isolation great beauty
and at times threat
where we're heading politics religion
and
identity have been combining to produce
a murderous result
[Music]
hundreds have died over the past year
following violent clashes
the government blames the bloodshed on
independence seeking ethnic
uighurs who've lived in this tough
landscape for generations
we're delving into one of the most
sensitive matters in china today
we pass the old border post and enter
xinjiang
next to pakistan and afghanistan it's
more than
one and a half million square kilometres
mostly made up
of dramatic sprawling desert with the
occasional oasis
immediately you come across paramilitary
police and
swat teams cars pulled over
identification documents registered
reporters haven't been able to get to
the bottom of events here
because of the many places to which we
can't get access
we're attempting to cross the province
to try and
find out what's been causing the tension
and the killing
president xi jinping's china is becoming
more hardline right across the country
here it's extreme though some would say
with good reason
[Music]
last year a team of jihadists from
xinjiang
planned to strike an iconic location
they were after a shocking image to go
round the world
[Music]
a car was driven into a crowd in front
of beijing's tiananmen
gate killing and maiming as it went
said to be a suicide mission the vehicle
burst into flames with a uyghur man his
wife
and mother-in-law all inside
the majority of violence has happened
inside xinjiang
just about every month there's a new
report
of a police station being raided or
civilians as the target of bombings or
stabbings
security forces have also fired on
crowds of angry wiggers
this is being motivated by training
videos from nearby countries
according to the chinese government
[Music]
neighborhoods here tend to form along
ethnic lines
and our first city is no exception it's
known as humi in chinese or kumal in
uyga
in the 1950s han chinese made up
11 of the population in this province
now after waves of government-sponsored
migration
they account for around half of those
living here
some critics say it's a deliberate
attempt to outnumber the locals
[Music]
for us it won't be long till chinese
security is on our tail
so we head straight to a predominantly
weaker street
[Music]
[Applause]
people come here to buy the traditional
clothing
that's still popular in everyday attire
machines have replaced hand weaving but
the designs have been passed down for
generations
um
this family business has benefited from
an
18 000 grant from the government and
we're told the town is getting more
prosperous
but what sort of a place is it becoming
um
foreign
the uyghurs are turkic speaking sunni
muslims
who've been ruled by local warlords
chinese
emperors and mongolian raiders with only
brief tastes of independence
there are welcoming people
yeah that's fresh
[Music]
it's good though it's good when it's
fresh yeah
it's really cool nice
these days if a uyghur travels beyond
their home
town this draws the immediate attention
of the police
so it doesn't take long for a foreign tv
crew
to be well and truly on the radar of the
local security apparatus
police say we'll need special permission
to be here working
in this country you can feel it when
you're about to be followed
quite a bit
we're allowed to leave and though the
stretches between
towns along the road blocks ahead have
been told we're coming
we're pulled over and our car is
confiscated
we have to move all our gear into a
police-provided vehicle
they claim our driver doesn't have the
right paperwork to ferry people around
and want us to move on to the next town
without him
gumbo they seem to have him on a
technicality
but when they tell us that our
translator has to go with them as well
as a witness we decide to draw a line
they cave in and allow our translator to
travel with us
after he provides a statement
our next town shanshan or pichain in
wiga
sits at the foot of enormous sand dunes
they spread for thousands of kilometers
and would be dangerous to get lost in
[Music]
it's more than 40 degrees here so i go
to buy some beer
with five government minders following
me
we're told they're here to help and
we'll be
helping every time we leave our hotel
sure enough next morning when we try to
leave and
film there's a welcoming committee on
hand
no need for a taxi we're told because
our official friends will take us
[Music]
they say we're in breach of procedures
for not having formally applied to
conduct
interviews here
in chicago
yet apparently the special procedures
don't extend to filming the scenery
so soon we're off to see this town's
most famous attraction
these massive dunes used to attract
travelers in much greater numbers
yet many have been scared off by the
recent tensions
well have a look at this eh
[Music]
away from the cameras travel companies
say numbers have halved amongst
foreigners
with a drop-off of up to 90 amongst
chinese tourists even this is a
sensitive subject
[Music]
we'd love to be able to speak to both
wigas
and han chinese about what it's like
living here
but that is absolutely not going to be
permitted
by local government officials the funny
thing is if you were able to do those
interviews you'd get all manner of views
some people would be unhappy with the
situation especially
uyghurs but you know you'd get others
who think that there is development here
and the place
is improving
day three in xinjiang and we're being
driven to the next
place by our minders they're keen to
make us
somebody else's responsibility and don't
really care what we do
as long as we're not doing it in their
jurisdiction
we arrive in turpan and can barely leave
the car
before a new team of smiling officials
is upon us
here even by chinese standards the
tailing
will be remarkable
this is interesting those guys have been
following us here they come again we're
actually in the lift
you'll notice our friends are just even
in the floor of this hotel following us
around
and sure enough in they come
one two
and three
at any time of the day or night the
corridor of our hotel floor
is like a busy street with the same 10
or 11 young men
desperately trying to act as if it's
normal to hang around outside our rooms
[Music]
one man leaves his surveillance notes on
our movements where we can spot them
number one went into number two's room
number two back to his room
number three and number four went out
together and so on
it might seem ridiculous to try and deny
that these
men have been sent to follow us but our
top shelf
party loyalist will at least give it a
go
and to our great surprise one is
organized
the guests from our hotel follow us
there in convoy as well
and he welcomes us into his 90 year old
mosque
in xinjiang the government keeps a close
eye on religious institutions
and can veto appointments in this
province
veils for women and beards for men are
actively discouraged by the authorities
we ask if people are free to practice
their religion
[Music]
we also ask why so much killing has
occurred recently
especially uighurs killing han chinese
[Music]
are not satisfied with their lives
a team of government officials records
every word the imam
says his can be a dangerous job an imam
will get into big trouble if he
questions the communist party's handling
of things
but being too close to the authorities
can also be deadly
in july this year in another city an
imam
seen as two pro government was stabbed
to death in a political assassination
we ask why this might have happened
[Music]
this imam certainly has a difficult path
to navigate
[Music]
we found a new driver and on the way to
the regional capital
we passed some of the historical and
economic reasons
for wanting to hang on to this territory
[Music]
on xinjiang's highways cars are now
being stopped for full
airport style bag scans
the government's message you think you
can pressure us
try this for pressure
[Laughter]
who are you where are you going how do
you know each other
soon we're in urumqi a prosperous city
with uyghurs in the minority
and very chinese characteristics
most people you talk to seem to like
living here
but a few months ago the calm
was smashed to pieces
you can't really tell now but this
street was once the site of a morning
market
all the way along here there were stalls
selling food and the locals would come
out to buy their breakfast
in may this year that's exactly what
they were doing when a couple of cars
pulled up it's not quite clear what
happened next
but those inside have either thrown
explosive devices
out of the vehicles or set off bombs
inside the cars
39 passes by were killed four of the
bombers died as well
though one was captured it was a bloody
attack which
sent shock waves through this community
how much power
foreign
took the dead and wounded from the
bombed marketplace to hospital
in a largely han chinese area most of
those killed were elderly people
[Music]
many han chinese whose parents and
grandparents were from urumqi
seem genuinely bewildered that social
harmony is cracking apart here
[Music]
the government's solution is integration
in one town uighurs and han chinese
are being offered generous cash handouts
if they intermarry
teaching in the uyga language is
disappearing in schools
everywhere and it's almost non-existent
at universities
but to really test the pulse of xinjiang
you have to head to the south
across the taklamatan desert in places
like hotan
uyghurs are still in the majority
[Music]
here many unsophisticated but brutal
attacks
have meant a heavier security presence
than in the north
in the south the internet is at times
totally blocked
and phone texting prevented
[Music]
here we briefly shake our considerable
escort
and get our only opportunity to speak to
a group of uighurs
without a dozen police and other
officials intimidating them
they're farmers seeking work in
construction or as seasonal fruit
pickers
and what do they think is causing the
tension here
so even here when we're in a crowd and
we
once you ask people about the violence
what's caused it they
the crowd who doesn't want to talk about
it they happy to talk about their lives
but they feel obviously it's a bit too
dangerous to speak about these things
even if they're not involved so even
just to give an opinion
is something that could really get you
into trouble
as for possible solutions
[Music]
foreign
the reason we've been hindered is to
prevent comments just like these getting
out
[Music]
we decided to visit a village in which
nearly 100 people were killed this july
other foreign journalists have not been
allowed into ali
we're driving now to the town which has
seen the
largest recent violent incident and the
numbers are quite
staggering according to official reports
amongst the passers-by two uighurs were
killed
and 35 han chinese killed
amongst the attackers 59 were shot dead
by police
and another 215 captured
by the local authorities now this has
been labeled like
other incidents as a terrorist attack
but with numbers like this it doesn't
seem like what you would call by any
definition a terrorist
type attack it sounds like some sort of
a grievance that's gotten out of hand
which and a mob has just attacked the
local police station and the local
government offices
we drive into the small village well off
the main road
most of the killing was around this
government building
we're prepared to hear anything that
officials have to say about what
happened
we turn to make another pass and our car
is pulled over
[Music]
well here we are it doesn't look like
we're going to be able to
go right down into this town but it's
interesting it's not a very big place
what prompts two hundred and seventy
people
one [__] moment
oh
without the mysterious interviewing
permit we supposedly require
we must leave none the wiser about these
events
we make our way along one last long
stretch of road
heading for our final destination
then on day 10 we reach kashgar
the city seen by many as the cultural
home of the uyghurs
centuries ago travellers who made it
across the desert
would divide this place with relief
upon making it all the way to these
crumbling alleyways
we must ask ourselves what we've
garnered from the trip
well in short it's a complex and
possibly deteriorating situation
with many answers yet to come
much of the discussion about the violent
clashes in xinjiang
has revolved around the question of
whether or not they've been caused
by international jihadist groups
encouraging this behavior
or local disaffection following
government policy on say
beards or veils but there's another
theory being put about by some academics
that this is really the inevitable
result of what you might
call a colonial type policy where one
culture subjugates another and dominates
it that this causes
general unhappiness in the community and
it doesn't take
much for it to rise to the top
[Music]
said to be involved in attacks or
planning attacks
have been rounded up by the dozen for
execution
but the crackdown has also taken in
moderate critics
beijing-based whig economist ilham
was given life imprisonment last week
after he simply criticized government
policies in xinjiang
[Music]
if even reasoned analysis is not allowed
some china watchers are warning that
beijing could be pushing the uyghurs
straight into the hands of religious
extremists
traveling to this historic city it's
fair to say that we've been
harassed unrelentingly all the way
but at the end of our journey we can put
xinjiang behind us
yet for people who live here this is
their
daily life experience and there's no
indication
that that's about to change in a hurry
[Music]
tonight the northern territory becomes
the first place to revoke its hot spot
declaration
for the majority of greater sydney after
just nine cases are reported in new
south wales a number of suburbs that are
already
directly located around the avalon
outbreak will
remain as hot spot areas
[Music]
a convicted terrorist to spend a further
three years in prison
after his 15-year jail term comes to an
end
australia's largest warship bound for
fiji to provide humanitarian aid
in the aftermath of tropical cyclone
yasa
and the third test between australia and
india to go ahead as planned
in sydney
[Music]
hello and welcome to abc news i'm nick
hose
the number of new covet infections in
new south wales
is staying relatively low bart
authorities say the threat isn't over
yet
there have been nine new cases taking
the avalon cluster to 104.
more than 60 000 people were tested
yesterday
that's another new record as contact
tracers do their work
a possible new threat has emerged three
cases have now been linked
to a sports bar at circular quay raising
fears the outbreak could be spreading in
the cbd
another single-digit day cause for some
holiday optimism
but still not a license for a sydney
silly season
don't let the uh the celebrations or the
christmas uh
activities reduce the necessary nature
in which we have to be on guard
we are not out of the woods yet we need
to work together
we need to track down any unrecognized
transmission
but one particular figure from today was
a welcome shock
to authorities i nearly fell off my
chair literally when
uh dr chan and i and others um
realized that 60 000 people came forward
to testing to 8 pm last night
it's topped monday's record number of
swabs by more than fifteen thousand
the northern beaches cluster is now at
and today there's further proof the
virus is spreading south
we are concerned about people who may
have been infectious who went
to work in the cbd and then have passed
that on to other people in the cbd and
those people have then passed it on
back in their communities three workers
in the northeast of the cbd have tested
positive
and another three cases are linked to a
circular key
sports bar does mean there's potential
chains of transmission that we're not on
top of
and that is a concern and some
transmission risks are still being found
an aged care resident is in isolation
after a nurse involved in transporting
them
tested positive the infections linked to
the avalon cluster
that the nurse was also recently
involved in a hotel quarantine
transfer and investigations continue
into a sydney airline worker who tested
positive
after returning from overseas through
the northern territory
mistakes will continue to be made and i
can't pretend that's not going to happen
something else that happened
unexpectedly the nt
has revoked its hot spot declaration for
greater sydney
but not the northern beaches and sydney
ciders quarantined in the top end will
be released
with restrictions for the next two days
in place crisis cabinet will next meet
on boxing day
to reassess the restrictions but on new
year's eve
there is one certainty seven minutes of
fireworks at midnight will be happening
no matter what
but um i'll certainly be watching it
from home and we encourage everybody
else to do that as well
a plea to stay in so sydney can get
back out in the new year tim swanston
abc news
and there's been a lot of confusion
today about the new covert rules on the
northern beaches
as locals tried to firm up their plans
for tomorrow
seventy thousand people live in the new
northern red zone
they won't be allowed to have any
visitors from outside the area
and they'll have to make do with up to
five local guests
at home for christmas people either side
of the narrowband bridge
are still coming to terms with the new
covert border
there's a lot of people online that are
confused
whether they can go across the
boundaries for shopping and exercise
everyone's been a bit anxious on edge
and we hadn't we didn't know how to
prepare for christmas this year it's
been
a little bit all over the place it's
pretty confusing from everyone i've been
speaking to
it doesn't really make sense one thing
that is for sure
is christmas lunch at his restaurant is
cancelled
i had seven functions booked the whole
restaurant my neighbors their restaurant
across the road
everyone was fully booked he says
there's one thing that's canned in a
good way
the takeaway margaritas he's now selling
hoping to spread some christmas cheer
bananas apples oranges pears
in brookvale residents from struggling
migrant communities are still able to
collect the basics with these covert
safe donations
i feel like you know in northern
business there's a lot of people are
ready to support
regardless your religion your you know
background
they always come and support especially
for migraine like me
the community is coming together for
christmas but not physically
with midnight mass replaced by a video
service
it really will be a silent night at st
kieran's
we need to give ourselves a pat on the
back for our patients
through all of this but not everyone has
been patient
a northern beaches woman who lives in
bilgola plateau has been issued with a
thousand dollar fine for breach and
covert restrictions
she was found more than 200 kilometers
away on the south coast
after she collapsed in a sanctuary point
pizza shop
the 37 year old was taken to hospital
and despite
showing covert symptoms refused to be
tested
she's been ordered to isolate for 14
days
james carmody abc news sydney
as victoria prepares for an almost
normal christmas
international airline crews are starting
to face tough new quarantine rules
forcing them into isolation over the
festive period
as victoria enjoys 55 days of no
community transmission
as victorians prepare for a near-normal
christmas
it's anything but normal for
international planes
landing at tullamarine as we've seen in
very recent developments both here and
in sydney that
you know the the aircrew represent a
significant risk 100
international airline workers have now
been forced into mandatory quarantine
for their melbourne layover
after a rule change we understand that
some of the international airlines find
that hard to
to comprehend but our position is
non-negotiable of 250 crew members
tested
two returned a positive result and more
passengers from sydney are heading into
hotel quarantine
regressively i think another 11 or 12
turned up yesterday um despite
our fairly extensive communication
program to encourage people not to
return
those border restrictions will remain
until at least next week
and so too personal boundaries if you've
been to new south wales
in the last 10 days if you're spending
time with people who you know have come
back from new south wales i would
encourage you
let's not hug and kiss right at this
moment in time giving will also
look different tomorrow we're going to
close our doors for the first time in 16
years on christmas day
food hampers are replacing the usual
christmas lunch for many of melbourne's
homeless
the packaging that we've put together
today is in fact has been prepared
by the parliamentary kitchen who have
done a superb job
victorians have also done a great job at
getting tested nearly 20
000 people were swabbed yesterday and no
new cases were recorded
the health department says 60 testing
sites will be open on christmas day
just at limited capacity social
distancing was difficult at
pre-christmas preparations across the
city
it's been surprisingly busy well not
surprisingly but like as expected but
it's been really nice
it's a huge reward after what has been a
very very difficult and challenging year
and i know that for many how
for many families this will have been a
year of loss there will be empty spaces
at the at the christmas table
a reminder of the year passed nicole
asher abc news
melbourne a convicted terrorist who once
praised osama bin laden
will stay in an australian prison after
victoria's supreme court deemed him
too risky to release abdul nasa benbrica
has spent 15 years behind bars
for leading a terror cell accused of
planning attacks on high-profile targets
but even though the father of seven has
finished his sentence
he'll stay in maximum security he's
court reporter danny tran
it was only after years in prison that
abdul nasa benbrica claimed to have seen
the error of his ways
telling others violence in the name of
allah was suddenly
no longer necessary what do they look
for here
but today victoria's supreme court found
that proposition
had a whiff of implausibility i'm
satisfied that the defendant has not
renounced or changed his previous
beliefs
which justified terrorist violence in
the name of allah
benbrica was sentenced to 15 years
behind bars for leading a terrorist
cell accused of planning high-profile
attacks
and discussing a possible assassination
attempt
on then-prime minister john howard the
sixty-year-old sentence was due to
finish in 2020
but those plans were dashed today after
commonwealth lawyers
successfully convinced victoria's
supreme court
to keep the firebrand cleric in maximum
security prison
i am satisfied to a high degree of
probability on the basis of admissible
evidence
that the defendant poses an unacceptable
risk it comes
more than a month after home affairs
minister peter dutton stripped membreca
of his australian citizenship he's the
first individual to have lost his
citizenship on shore
under the terrorism related provisions
of the australian citizenship act
his crimes were not the product of some
moments of carelessness or lack of
judgment
his was well organized and executed
conduct driven by very powerful feelings
and beliefs
which had him perfectly willing to
perpetrate extreme and outrageous crimes
in the name of his faith abdul nasser
bin breaker
didn't react as he learned the next
three years of his life would be no
different to the last
15. the question now is whether he'll
appeal against the order
danny tran abc news melbourne
the family of an apprentice tradie
killed by a senior constable
is calling for a royal commission into
policing in new south wales
bradley balzan was chased by two
officers in western sydney
because they thought he looked
suspicious police then
shot the 20-year-old after he allegedly
grabbed one of their
guns now his loved ones are demanding
answers
mark ready filed this exclusive report
this photo is
bradley and adam father and son a wall
of happy memories now
a memorial for a grieving family he was
handsome
he was cheeky he was funny he made us
laugh
he loved his family he loved his pets
his friends for nola bowsen
christmas will be forever cursed
yesterday her grandson bradley
was killed by police i think it was
police brutality
because um everything that's happened to
him
has been terrifying the terror unfolded
on a trip to the shops
four plainclothed officers in an
unmarked car pulled up next to him
his family says an officer asked what
are you doing
they kept following him
and he said something like i'm sick of
this therefore and he ran
because he was scared police claim the
20-year-old was acting suspiciously
and so chased him into his own backyard
even to that stage they did not notify
that
that they were police officers according
to his family bradley bowsen grabbed a
shovel to defend himself
before his dog bit one of two senior
constables
police claim he snatched one of their
guns and fired the first shot
his grandmother says pepper spray was
used and then an officer
fired the deadly shot shooting someone
in the stomach
isn't shooting to stop that's shooting
to kill bradley bolson's father
adam said he was told to stay inside
when the shooting unfolded
he said he only realized his son was a
man shot dead by police
when they showed him a photo of the body
covered in blood
an independent review will follow an
internal police investigation
but that means little to his parents
devastated
they've got one child they've got one
child and now they've got none
and that's never ever going to come back
old photographs are all that remain
mark ready abc news sydney
political leaders have used their annual
christmas message to thank essential
workers
on the front line of the covert 19
emergency
the sacrifice of medical aged care and
retail
staff has been highlighted by the prime
minister and opposition leader
who have also urged people to keep safe
during the festive season
in wishing everyone a very stay safe
stay covered safe
may god bless you and your family this
christmas merry christmas australia
may the festive season bring peace to
you
and your loved ones
and may 2020
get in the bin both leaders have also
acknowledged the difficulties faced by
many australians this year
australia's largest warship will travel
to fiji to help the pacific nation
deal with the aftermath of tropical
cyclone yasa
hmas satellite is heading from brisbane
carrying 750 personnel
including specialist medical and
engineering teams
they'll provide immediate assistance to
thousands of fijians particularly in
remote islands
we're expecting that the the measures
we've applied here on the wharf before
the ship sails will mean
it's a very coveted safe mindful
deployment to fiji
to make sure we don't take covert out to
that particular country
entire villages were flattened and
thousands left homeless when the deadly
category 5 cyclone
hit fiji last week
it's supposed to be a time of joy but
new figures show that the festive season
also brings a sharp rise in cases of
family violence
christmas and boxing day are the worst
prompting a new public
safety campaign urging early
intervention
these public safety campaigns show for
some families
christmas is not a time of joy i hide in
the bed when it starts and i block my
ears so i can't hear
the national no to violence campaign has
collected police data from around the
country
that reveals how family violence
escalates
over christmas in victoria assaults
jumped
39 on christmas day last year and stayed
high on boxing day
in new south wales domestic assault
rates went up by more than half
queensland data shows incidents rose by
nearly a third
over those two days these statistics
show
that the festive season is one of the
most dangerous times
for families in the nt reports to police
jumped up to 18
in south australia offences rose by up
to 12 and a half percent
and in tasmania there's been a 35
rise in incidence over christmas in the
past decade
it's a stressful time there's financial
pressure um
and there's also increased alcohol
consumption and we're worried
particularly this year
with the extra pressure of lockdown and
the pandemic that the numbers are going
to be worse
it's very very likely that the stats may
not double but may
triple this year it's prompted a
campaign urging people to have a safe
festive season
if they see something concerning they
they should do something they should
they should call it out don't be